### Basically R is a dialect of S. 

- S was a language that was developed by @John Chambers and at the now-defunct Bell Labs And it was initiated in 1976 as an internal statistical analysis environment, so the, an environment that people at Bell Labs could use to analyze data.
- Initially it was implemented as a series of FORTRAN libraries to kind of implement routines that were tedious to have to do over and over again, so there were FORTRAN libraries to repeat these statistical routines.

- Early versions of the language did not contain functions for statistical modelling. So in 1988, the system was rewritten in the C language and to make it more portable across systems and it began to resemble the system that we have today. So this was version three. And there was a seminal book the, called the Statistical Models in S written by John Chambers and Trevor Hastie. Sometimes referred to as the white book. And that documents, all the statistical analysis functionality that came into the version, that version of the language. Version four of the S language was released in 1998.
- The book Programming with Data, which is a reference for this course, is written by John Chambers sometimes called the green book and it documents version four of the S language. So, R is an implementation of the S language, that was originally del, developed in Bell Labs. So, just a little bit more history here, in 1993 Bell Labs gave a corporation called StatSci which became Insightful Corporation, an exclusive license to develop and sell the S language. In 2004, Insightful purchased the S language completely from Lucent. So Bell Labs became Lucent Technology for $2 million, and became the current owner. In 2006, Alcatel purchased Lucent Technologies and it's now called Alcatel-Lucent.
- Insightful developed a product which was a implementation of the S language under the product name S-PLUS. And they built a number of fancy features into it for example graphical user interfaces and all kinds of a nice tools. that, so that's where the plus comes from in S-PLUS. In 2008 the Insightful Corporation was acquired a company called TIBCO for $25 million dollars and that's more or less where it stands. The basic fundamentals of the S language have not really changed since 1998 and the language that existed in 1998 looks more or less like we, like what we use today at least superficially. And it's worth nothing that in 1998 the S language won the association for repeating machinery software system award.
- So in a document called the stages and the evolution of S, John Chambers who was the original writer of the S language the, the original creator kind of laid out his key principal with designing the S language
- They wanted to create an interactive environment where you didn't have to think of themselves as programming, right. Then he says then as the needs became clearer and their sophistication increased, they should be able to slide gradually into programming, when the language and system aspects would become more important. So the basic idea is behind the S language and then later the R language is that people would enter the language in an interactive environment. Where they could use the lang, the environment, without knowing about any sort of programming, or having to know very detailed aspects of the language. So, they could use the environment to look at data, and do basic analyses. And then when the environment, when they kind of outgrew their environment, then they can get into programming. They could get into learning the language aspects and learning to develop their own tools and, and the system would very kind of, would promote the kind of transition from user to programmer. And so that was the basic philosopy of the S language.
# R is a relatively recent development. In 1991, it was created in New Zealand by two gentleman named Ross Ihaka and Robert Gentleman.
### They talked about their experience developing R in a paper writ-, published in 1996 in the Journal of Computation and Graphical Statistics. In 1993 the first announcement of R was made to the public. 1995, Martin Michler convinced Ross and Robert to use, to license R under the GNU General Public License. One called R-help, which is a general mailing list for questions. And R-devel, which is a more specific mailing list for people who are doing development work in R.

### 1997, what's called the R core group was formed. And these contained a lot of, this contained a lot of the same people. From the S-PLUS who developed S-PLUS. And the core group, basically controls the source code for R. So this, so the primary source code for R. Can only be modified by members of the R core group. However, a number of, people who are not in the core group have suggested changes to R, and they have been accepted by the core group.

- The software the core software of R is actually quite lean. Its functionality is divided into modular packages, so you don't have to download and install a massive piece of software. Whereas you can download a very small piece of fundamental core, kind of functions, and then add things on as you need them. So it's graphics capabilities are very sophisticated and give the user a lot of control over how graphics are, are, are created, and in my opinion are better than most stat packages. It might even be the best for the mo- kind of a general purpose statistical package. It's very useful for interactive work as I said before, but it contains this powerful programming language.
- The freedom zero is the freedom to run the program for any purpose, so you don't need. There's no restrictions on how you can run the program or when you can run the program or what you can or cannot do with it.
- So, there a couple drawbacks of R.
Since then and so as, one of the results of that for example is that there is little built in support for dynamic or 3D graphics. But things have improved, greatly and not on that front since the old days and there's a lot of interesting tools now packages for doing dynamic or 3D graphics.
- Another drawback of R that I, I hear a lot about is that the functionality is based on consumer demand and basically user contributions. So if no one feels like implementing your favorite message then that's your job to do. And so you can't, there is no corporation, there's no company that you can complain to. There's no helpline that you can call to say that, to demand a specific implementation or a specific feature. If the feature's not there, then you have to build it.
- Another drawback which is a little bit more technical is that the objects that you manipulate in R have to be stored in the physical memory of the computer. And so if the object is bigger, than the physical memory of the computer, then you can't load it into memory. And then therefore you can't do something in R with that object. So there have been a lot of advancements to deal with this too. Both in the R language and also just in the hardware side there are computers now that you can buy with tremendous amounts of memory. And so some of those problems had been resolved just by, kind of, improvements in technology. But nevertheless, as we enter the, kind of, big data era where you have larger and larger data sets, the model of loading objects into physical memory can be a limitation. And finally, I'll just say that R is not ideal for all possible situations.
- There are other packages contained in the base system which includes for example util stats, data sets, graphics and a bunch of other packages that are kind of fundamental packages that more or less everyone might use. And then there are a series of recommended packages, so, boot for bootstrap, class for classification, cluster, codetools, foreign, and a variety of other packages. These are the commonly used packages, they may not be critical packages, but they're commonly used by many people. So all of these packages come with this, the base R system that you download from CRAN.
- There are also packages associated with the Bioconductor project, which is a packaged, which is a project designed to implement R software for, kind of, genomic and, kind of, bio, biological data analysis. and, of course, there are also all their packages made that people make available on their personal websites. And there's really no reliable way to keep track of how many packages are available in this fashion. So, there's really thousands of packages out there written by people. That you can discover and use, to analyze data.
- The R installation administration manual is, is most useful if you want to build R from the source code, and I'll talk about that in another video. And then the R internals manual. Is is a really technical document for how R is designed. How R is implemented at a very low level. And it's not really for the faint of heart. But if you're that kind of person, who wants to know how R works at a very, very low level, this is the document for you.

